The area of a circle is \pi r^2.
Here, Area is a "function" of r.
Input any r to this function and it gives you the area.

Functions can be thought of as machines. Give them inputs and they give you outputs.
Functions do have restrictions on what they can give you. (The vertical line test)

Domain and range. (Brief. More later)

The book mentions the 4 Ways to represent a function.
With words , By explicit formula (Algebraically) , With a graph , With a table (Numerically)
Depending on what we want to do, one representation might be better than the others

Graphing.
To graph functions with one input and one output (2d functions) we first draw a 2d coordinate system.
Commonly, the horizontal axis is where choose the inputs from. (The r axis in A = \pi r^2)
For that r (the input) calculate area (the output) and plot the point (r,A).
As you choose different input, you might get different output.

More about domains and how to find them

Piecewise functions

Symmetry

How graphs are shifted and stretched

Composition and their domains.




## Symmetry, Transformations , Piecewise functions, Composition of functions , Domain and range of composite functions.


In this video, we'll talk about symmetry and transformation of functions. Before getting into it, let's recall how we graph a function. Take a function like this: [f(x)= x^3 - 3x], to make the graph, we can first choose some x in the domain as our input. I choose -1. And For that x, we calculate the output which is f(-1). That's just evaluating the function at that x. And that turns out to be 2. That means, if the input is -1, the output is 2. Now we plot the point (-1 , f(-1)). But a single point is not the graph. If we repeat this for all x-values in the domain, plotting that (x,f(x)) each time, we get the full graph of the function. In this animation, I only used x's between -2.5 to 2.5 because the other xs give points off-screen. In a complete graph, these lines will continue forever. Okay, Now let's get into the main topics of this video. And the first of them is: Symmetry. Symmetry is a property of an object. Mathematically, it is the property of being unchanged after a transformation. Let's look at this triangle. One of the symmetries of this triangle is it is symmertic under the reflection about this line. It means if you "reflect" the triangle about this line, it looks the same as the original. Reflection about this line is one of the _transformations, that leaves the triangle unchanged. The triangle is also symmetric under the reflection about this line. And it's also symmetric under this reflection. This triangle is symmetric for even transformations other than reflection. Like a 120 degrees rotation about the center. In fact, _these are all of the symmetries of this triangle [while editing, play once forward and once reverse]. And Yes I have also listed the zero degrees rotation, that's the action of doing nothing which also leaves the triangle unchanged. It actually has a fancy name, it's called the identity element of this set of actions. Okay, that was a small introduction to symmetry, Now looking back at this graph, is this graph symmetric in any way? [Pause] And the answer is yes. It is symmetric under a 180 degrees rotation about the origin. The graph looks the same, or is _unchanged after this action _or the transformed graph perfectly coincides with the original graph. We call this type of function odd function. Here is a proper definition of an odd function: A function is an odd function, if the graph of that function is symmetric under a 180 degrees rotation about the origin. Again, by symmetric, I mean the transformed graph looks the same as the original graph. There are also even functions. A function is an even function, if the graph of that function is symmetric under a reflection about the Y-axis. If we apply this transformation to this graph, it does not coincide with the original, so, it's not an even function. And it turns out these two symmetries are particularly more useful to talk about for a function. Let's look at some graphs and identify them as even or odd functions. Here's our graph, to see if this is an odd function, we just rotate the graph 180 degrees. It's not the same graph after that, so not an odd function. If we reflect about the y-axis, it perfectly coincides. So, it is an even function. Here are some more examples without me talking. [don't show equations just graphs. y=x^2 , y = |x|/x , y = (x^4)/2-2x^2 + x -1 , sin(x) , y = 0, floor(x)] [for each graph, have an original and a ghost, transform the original both ways. If not symmetric flip it and try next one.] Okay, now you can tell if a function is even or odd by looking at its graph. But what if you don't have a graph of the function, just the equation, well, there is a way. I mean there are 2 ways really, first is to just make the graph and then and then do the transformations. Here is the next way and you might be familiar with this one to tell if a function is odd. Let's say we want to see if the given function on the screen is an odd function, first we find f of negative x. Just replace all of the x's with negative x. And if that turns out to be the same as negative f of x, like it does in this case, it is an odd function. And this works for any function not just this one. If f of -x is negative f of x, then it's an odd function. But for some other example function if you find f of negative x [f(x) = x^4 - 2x^2 + 1] and it turns out to be the original f of x, it is an even function. So, I'll repeat this one more time, if you have a function, it is an odd function if f of negative x is equal to negative f of x. To find f of negative x, you just replace all of the x's in the function with a negative x and see what happens. and similarly, It is an even function if f of negative x is equal to f of x. If f of negative x is neither of those, then it's neither odd nor even. Now you've seen the two ways to ckeck if the function is even or odd, the graphical way and the algebraic way. try to argue that both ways are in fact the same way. Okay, now that we’ve talked about symmetry, let’s talk more generally about how a function’s graph can transform. If you have an equation of a function, you can add or change some parts of the equation, and sometimes the graph of the function changes predictibly. We'll talk about 3 main types of function transformations. Translation, or shifting [visually translate a graph], stretching or compressing and reflecting. We'll go over each of them not only how to apply those transformations but also why it works. First, If you have a function, [f(x) = x^2/3] remember what its graph means. It is the collection of the points [choose a random point, fade in] x [draw a line from y axis to the point] comma f of x [draw a line from x axis] for each x in the domain of the function. Knowing this is very important if you want to understand the transformations. Okay, so, Now if we define a new function, g of x = f of x - 2, think what the new graph is going to look like. First of all, this function g is defined in terms of f. So, what g does, is whatever input it gets, it gives that to f, and f gives some output for that input and we subtract 2 from it and that's the output of g. So the output of g at any input x is just 2 less than the output of f at that x. And because we know how f works, we can also write g in a more simplified way. Like this. But, I wanna switch it back, to make it more general. We can also note that the domain of g is the same as the domain of f. And what we want to know is what does the graph of g look like. And it's very easy to see. For every input x, the height of the curve at that x is just 2 less than the oiginal height of the red curve. Because the output of g is 2 less than the output of f. And the shifting works for any type of function. Because of the same logic, the output of g is 2 less than the output of f. Say you added a 1 instead. Then it would be shifted up by 1. So, if you know what the graph of a function looks like, adding a constant 'a' at the end of the definition, just shifts the graph vertically by 'a' units. Up if a is positive and down if a is negative. You can also shift a graph horizontally. Take a look at this definition of g [g(x) = f(x-1)]. This time, f and g give the same outputs but for different inputs. Okay, g is defined like this and we wanna graph g. So, we pick some x and try to find the output of the function g. What g does is it subtracts 1 from its input and gives that as the input for f. So g got this input but f got this. So, f gives you back this height. And that's the output of g too but for this input. So to get the output of g you just slide the output of f 1 unit to the right. But that only one point on the graph, if you slide all of the points to the right, then that's the graph of g. And if we had f of x + 1 instead, the graph would shift to the left. And more generally, if we have a plus 'a' here, the graph is shifted 'a' units. Left if a is positive and right if a is negative. And you can also combine the horizontal and vertical shifts to move the graph anywhere. So, for practice, if I have this function [f(x) = -x^2] which is a parabola, and its vertex is at the origin, how should I define a new function in terms of f with some transformations, such that the vertex moves over to the point (2 , 3)? Let's call the new function g of x. Now, what we want to do is shift it right by 2 units and up by 3 units. First, to shift it right, I can write this, f of x minus 2, because remember if it is negative, it is a shift to the right. And now to shift up by 3 units, we can add 3 at the end of this modified function. Now this is a valid solution and g depends on f. If we wanted to make g independent of f, we need to get rid of this expression. And we know from the definition of f, f of some input x is nevative x squared. Then f of x-2 would be negative x-2 squared. The top one says graph of g is whatever graph of f is shifted right 2 and up 3. The bottom one says graph of g is the graph of negative x squared shifted right 2 and up 3. A slight difference there. Now, onto stretching and compressing the graph. This can also happen both vertically and horizontally. Let's look at the vertical one first. If we have a function f of x and its graph. And we define a new function g of x like this, 2 times f of x. And Just like before, g is defined in terms of f. The output of g at every input, is twice the output of f at that input. This is what the graph of g looks like. You can see, the height of each point in the green curve is twice the height of the red curve. If you only focus on the red curve here, the graph of f, this point on the x-axis means at that value of x, which is about negative 1 point 03, the output of the function f is zero. So, the output of g is also 0 at that x, because g would be 2 times zero at that x. This function has only one x intercept but by the same logic, points on the x-axis will not move after this type of transformation. And you can see, this multiplication has the effect of stretching the graph by a factor of 2. And generally, if you have some a here, it would stretch by a factor of a. If a is less than 1, like 0.5, then the graph is sqeezed or compressed by a factor 2. Because 0.5 is 1 over 2. You can think of it like this, if you are multiplying by a constant, then the graph is stretched by that constant factor and if you are dividing by a constant, then the graph is compressed by that constant factor. Right now, g of x looks like f of x divided by 2. So, it is compressed by a factor of 2 or also stretched by a factor of 0.5. Both of them mean the same thing. But what if I slide the slider over here, making the value of a negative. It flips the graph vertically. Let's see why that happens. Think what happens to an input to g. The output of g is the output of f times -1. That's what the definition of g says. The output of f, multiplied by negative 1. That just looks like flipping the point about the x axis. And if we do that for all x's, we get the full graph of g which is just graph of f, reflected about the x-axis. if the constant was negative 2, it is like multiplying by 2 first and then by negative 1. Which just means the graph is stretched by a factor of 2 and also flipped. it it was negative 0.5 or negatice 1 over 2, first compressed by a factor of 2 and then flipped. And all that is just in the vertical direction. We can also stretch the graph in the horizontal direction. Let's define g like this [g(x) = f(3x)] and see what happens. So to graph the function g, we first pick some number x as an input. This time what g does, is it multiplies the input by 3 and then gives that to f. So, if g gets 1 as it's input, f gets 3. So g says my output here is whatever f's output is here. Something like this. If we find the output of g for all of the x's, we would get the full graph of g. To do that, I will move this point right and left which is the input for g. And trace out the path of this point because the height of this point is the output of g. And that height is just the copy of this height. And I'll also make sure this point is 3 times as far from this point. Okay, now I am going to move these points. So you can see, this has the effect of shrinking the graph horizontally by a factor of 3. So multiplying actually shrinks the graph. And, the point on the y-axis will stay at the same place after this transformation. Because, the y intercept, for the green curve is 0 , g(0) which by this definition, is 0,f(0) which is the y intercept for the red curve. And dividing does the opposite. It stretches the graph by the factor of 3. And if you multiply by a negative number, First it does the stretching or the compressing and then it flips horizontally. And more generally, if there is an a here, the graph is compressed by a factor of a in the horizontal direction. Aaand that's it for the transformations. That was a lot. So, let's recap. If we have a graph of a function and we define a new function like this:[g(x) = af(bx+c)+d] where a,b,c and d are any constants. Based on these constants, the graph of g is gonna be some transformed version of graph of f. It can be shifted or stretched or squeezed or flipped in one of the axies or any combination of those transformations. Let me give all of the constants values such that g of x is equal to f of x. And I'll move these two over here so it's easier to see. Right now, the graph of g is on top of because the constants are not changing anything. But if I change the value of d, the graph moves up. And it shifts exactly by d units. If d is negative, the graph shifts down. If I instead change c, it moves in the horizontal direction. Left if c is positive and right if c is negative. So, if we want to move the graph, we change the values of c and d. But if we change a, the graph is stretched. remember, b, c and d do not have any effect on the graph right now. the graph is vertically stretched by a factor of a. Meaning the y-value of every point in the green graph is y-value in the red graph times a. If a is less than 1, the graph is compressed instead. You can still say it is stretched by a factor of a or you can say it is compressed by a factor of 1 over a. If a is zero, it is squeezed infinitely into a line but if a is negative, the graph first gets flipped and then gets stretched by a factor of the absolute value of a. In all cases, the graph is stretched by the factor of a. the y-value of every point in the green graph is y-value in the red graph times a. Changing b, makes it compressed in the horizontal direction. The graph is compressed by a factor of b. Meaning the x-value of every point in the green graph is the x-value in the red graph divided by b. If b is less than 1, it is stretched by a factor of 1 over b. if b is negative, it flips the graph and then compresses. Aand that's how a,b,c and d affect the graph individually. But, what if they are all present at the same time. Like this: [a = 1.5 , b = 2 , c = 3 , d = -1]. And when it is a combination of everything, things are kind of unintuitive. Let me ask you a question, among these constants, a,b,c and d which one do you think acts on the graph first? I mean you know what a,b,c and d do individually. But together, which one does its thing first. And its a meaningful question, first stretching by a factor of 2 and shifting up 2 is different than first shifting up 2 then stretching by a factor of 2. When you look at the order of operations, You might think 'b' acts first. The compression in the horizontal direction. Because, for an input to g, it is first multiplied by b then added to c and then f gives an output which is multiplied by a and finally d is added. So you might think the transformations happen in that order. But that's incorrect. When I was learning about this for the first time, I was making the same mistake. But turns out, 'c' acts first and then b then a then d. That's the correct order. And I encourage _you to figure out why this is the correct order. This is not too difficult to figure out but also not that easy. Now, let's see what the transformed graph or the graph of g looks like. First it is shifted to the left by 3 units. because c acts first and it's value is positive 3. Let's track where some of the features in the original curve end up. Like this valley at x equals 1 is now at x equals negative 2. This peak at negative 2 , 3 is now at negative 5 , 3. and this part where it intersects the origin is now at -3,0. Now, b compresses the shifted graph horizontally by a factor of 2. All points in the shifted graph that were x,y are now at x divided 2 , y. The valley that was at x equals negative 2 is now at x equals - 1. And all of the other features have also compressed accordingly. And again, this is not the same graph as first compressing and shifting. Okay, Now, the graph is stretched vertically by a factor of 1.5. That was the constant a that stretches vertically. You can notice the peaks and valleys have moved accordingly. And finally d does the shifting, down  by 1 unit. So this is the final transformed graph. Let's do a few practice problems. Here is the first one: [Given the following function: f(x) = x^2 and its graph, what would be the graph of this function g(x) = -(x-2^2 - 1)]. So, what we do first is write g in terms of f. In g, we have the quantity x - 2 squared. And we have f which squares things. So this can become f of x - 2. Now we can compare this to this. Which says a = -1, b = 1 , c = negative 2 and d equals -1. We said c acts first. So we shift it to the right by 2 units. Then b which says compress in the horizontal direction but compress by a factor of 1 does nothing. Then a is negative 1 that only flips the graph vertically and it doesnot stretch because the absolute value is 1. And finally d which shifts down 1 unit. And that's it. Let's do one more: [f(x) = e^x g(x) = 1/e^{2x-1} - 1] So, we want to write g in terms of f. And f of some number is e raised to that number. So if we have e raised to something, we can write that in terms of f. So we can write g like this: [1/f(2x+1) - 1]. Now g is in terms of f but this is not something we've been working with. We don't really know how this works. So, this didn't work. But we can write g like this:[e ^ -{2x+1} - 1]. Which we can write using f like this: [f(-(2x+1))-1] But we can't really compare this with our "standard" form. But distributing the negative makes it something we can work with. From here, we get a = 1, b = -2 , c = -1 and d = -1. And we know what all of them do and in what order. c  does its thing first, shifting to the right by 1 unit. And remember, c is nevative means right and c is positive means left. Then we have b = -2 which flips the graph horizontally first then compresses by a factor of 2. Again, absolute value of b more than 1 means compress and less than 1 means stretch. Next is a which is 1 so, no change. Then d is negative 1 so shift down by one unit. Aand that's the final graph. Let's wrap this one up right here. Next, i'll talk about piecewise functions and composite functions.